Debulleting Porch Architecture & Components - Porch API server (#1041)
nephio-project/porch: docs/content/en/docs/5_architecture_and_components/porch-apiserver/design.md

The Porch API Server implements Kubernetes' REST storage interface to provide custom storage backends for Porch resources. Unlike standard Kubernetes resources that store data in etcd, Porch resources delegate to the Engine which manages package data in Git repositories through the Cache.

> The Storage Interface implements standard Kubernetes storage. It provides CRUD operations (Create, Get, List, Update, Delete), supports watch for real-time change notifications and delegates all operations to CaD Engine However, it has no direct etcd storage, as the packages are stored in Git.

Author: corrected

> The Storage Interface implements standard Kubernetes storage. It provides CRUD operations (Create, Get, List, Update, Delete), supports watch for real-time change notifications and delegates all operations to CaD Engine. However, it has no direct etcd storage, as the packages are stored in Git.

Reviewer: Should we not capitalize "watch"? It is technically the name of the operation, like Create, Get, List, etc.

Author: updated

### Validation Strategy

> The purpose of the validation stategy is to validate resource specifications before persistence. There are three validation types: create, update and status. The create validation ensures that the fields present and the lifecycle constraints enforced. The update validation validates resource version, lifecycle transitions and immutability rules. The status validation validates status subresource updates.

Author: corrected

> The purpose of the validation strategy is to validate resource specifications before persistence. There are three validation types: create, update and status. The create validation ensures that the fields present and the lifecycle constraints enforced. The update validation validates resource version, lifecycle transitions and immutability rules. The status validation validates status subresource updates.

Reviewer: I think there is too much "validate" in this paragraph.

```suggestion
The purpose of the this strategy is to validate resource specifications before persistence. It has three types: create, update and status. The create type ensures that the fields present and the lifecycle constraints enforced. For update, it checks the resource version, lifecycle transitions and immutability rules. Finally, the status type validates status subresource updates.
```

(Don't take the suggestion literally, it is just a suggestion)

Author: updated

### Admission Strategy

> The purpose of the admission strategy is to apply admission control policies and defaults. There are three admission oprations: PrepareForCreate, PrepareForUpdate and Canonicalize. PrepareForCreate sets defaults, generates names and initializes status. PrepareForUpdate validates resource version and enforces immutability. Canonicalize normalizes resource representation.

Author: corrected

> The purpose of the admission strategy is to apply admission control policies and defaults. There are three admission operations: PrepareForCreate, PrepareForUpdate and Canonicalize. PrepareForCreate sets defaults, generates names and initializes status. PrepareForUpdate validates resource version and enforces immutability. Canonicalize normalizes resource representation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The purpose of this strategy is to apply admission control policies and defaults. There are three kinds of operations: PrepareForCreate, PrepareForUpdate and Canonicalize. PrepareForCreate sets defaults, generates names and initializes status. PrepareForUpdate validates resource version and enforces immutability. Canonicalize normalizes resource representation.
```

Author: updated

### Table Conversion Strategy

> The purpose of the table conversion strategy is to conver esources to table format for kubectl display. The table conversion defines columns for kubectl output (Name, Package, Workspace, Revision, Lifecycle), extracts values from resource specifications, formats data for human-readable display and supports both list as well as individual resource views.

Author: corrected

> The purpose of the table conversion strategy is to convert resources to table format for kubectl display. The table conversion defines columns for kubectl output (Name, Package, Workspace, Revision, Lifecycle), extracts values from resource specifications, formats data for human-readable display and supports both list as well as individual resource views.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Its purpose is to convert resources to a table format for `kubectl` display. The conversion defines columns for `kubectl` output (Name, Package, Workspace, Revision, Lifecycle), extracts values from resource specifications and formats data for human-readable display. It supports both list and individual resource views.
```

Author: updated

- **PackageRevisionResources**: Contains the actual resource content of a package revision
- **Package**: Represents a package across all its revisions

> **Versions:** v1alpha1: Current version with all resources

Reviewer: We do already have v1alpha2 of PackageRevision, I assume that will be part of #971 @efiacor

> **Characteristics:** The porch.kpt.dev API group is the primary API group for package management, and all its resources are namespaced. It is served via Kubernetes API aggregation, not CRDs, and supports full CRUD and Watch operations. This group integrates with Engine for all operations and uses custom REST storage, which is Git-backed, not etcd.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Characteristics:** The porch.kpt.dev API group is the primary API group for package management, and all its resources are namespaced. It is served via Kubernetes API aggregation, not CRDs, and supports full CRUD and Watch operations. This group integrates with Engine for all operations and uses custom REST storage, which is backed by Git, not etcd.
```

### config.porch.kpt.dev API Group (CRDs)

**Resources:**
- **Repository**: Configures Git repositories for package storage
- **PackageRev**: Internal metadata resource for tracking package revisions

> **Versions:** v1alpha1: Current version for all resources

Reviewer: Technically, there is a v1alpha2 that solely contains PackageVariantSets, should maybe update this in another PR.

### REST Storage vs etcd

Instead of using etcd, custom REST storage is implemented that delegates to Engine.

Package data naturally lives in Git repositories, and etcd is not suitable for storing large package content. The Engine provides the necessary abstraction over Git, which enables a draft-commit workflow for package modifications.

Using etcd would require duplicating package content, causing large storage overhead. As an alternative, a hybrid approach was considered as well. Metadata would be stored in etcd, content in Git. However, that would add complexity.

> This decision has some trade-offs. Custom storage, while more complex than standard etcd, offers the significant advantages of enabling Git-native package management and providing better scalability for large packages.

Reviewer: Again, just a heads up to @efiacor that this will conflict in #971

Reviewer 2: Yes. I will have to come up with a clean way to separate the old vs new arch

### Strategy-Based Validation

Kubernetes strategy pattern for validation and admission control is used.

Following Kubernetes conventions, this approach separates validation logic from storage logic, which enables reuse across different storage implementations and provides consistent validation behavior.

> Two alternatives were considered. Either validate in engine or webhook-based validation. However, validation in engine duplocated valiation logic, while webhook-based validation adds network overhead and complexity.

Author: corrected

This decision has some trade-offs. The strategy pattern, while adding an abstraction layer, provides a clean separation of concerns and enables independent testing of validation.

### Watch via WatcherManager

Watch streams using Engine's WatcherManager is implemented.

The engine knows when package revisions change. Combined with the WatcherManager's efficient fan-out, this solution enables real-time notifications while avoiding the overhead of polling or etcd watches.

Two alternatives were considered, either etcd watch or polling. However, etcd watch requires storing all data in etcd, while polling is inefficient and causes high latency.

This decision has some trade-offs. A custom watch implementation, while more complex to develop, offers efficient real-time updates and scales effectively to support many concurrent watchers.

### Repository Management Pattern

> Repository synchronization is extracted into a dedicated Repository Controller using controller-runtime framework.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Repository synchronization is extracted into a dedicated Repository Controller using `controller-runtime` framework.
```

Author: updated

> This design separates concerns by dedicating the API server to request handling and the controller to managing the repository lifecycle. Leveraging controller-runtime provides proven patterns for watch management, work queues, and leader election, leading to better scalability through concurrent reconciliation and rate limiting. This architecture also allows for independent deployment and scaling of repository management, and facilitates cleaner shutdown and error handling.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This design separates concerns by dedicating the API server to request handling and the controller to managing the repository lifecycle. Leveraging `controller-runtime` provides proven patterns for watch management, work queues, and leader election, leading to better scalability through concurrent reconciliation and rate limiting. This architecture also allows for independent deployment and scaling of repository management, and facilitates cleaner shutdown and error handling.
```

Author: updated

Three alternatives were considered: background goroutines in the API server, sync on demand or the implementation of custom controller. However, background goroutines mix request handling with background sync logic, sync on demand adds latency to API requests and custom controller implementation reinvents controller-runtime features.

This decision has some trade-offs. The introduction of a dedicated Repository Controller as an additional deployment component offers significant advantages, including a better separation of concerns, enhanced operational flexibility, and improved observability through specialized controller metrics and status reporting.

> The Repository Controller manages Repository CRs through standard Kubernetes reconciliation to manage Repository Custom Resources (CRs). Its core functions include watching for changes in Repository specifications, conducting scheduled health checks and full synchronizations, updating the repository status with synchronization results and package metadata, and managing repository deletion and cache cleanup.For more inforamtion, see [Repository Controller]({{% relref "/docs/5_architecture_and_components/controllers/repository-controller/_index.md" %}}).

Author: corrected

### Dependency Injection

> Engine, Cache, and clients are configures through dependency injection.

Author: corrected

This approach is justified by its ability to enable testing with mock implementations, provide flexible configuration options, separate the construction of components from their usage, and support various deployment scenarios.

> Two alternatives wee considered. Either global singletons or a service locator. However, global singletons are hard to test and configure, and a serivce locator hides dependencies.

Author: corrected

> Two alternatives wee considered. Either global singletons or a service locator. However, global singletons are hard to test and configure, and a serivce locator hides dependencies.

Author: corrected
